Final Report Section Guidance

Background research: Have I ...

Explained the problem clearly?
Identified relevant areas for investigation and discussed them critically in the report under appropriately organised headings?
Critically reviewed previous attempts to solve this and similar problems?
Justified any claims made using credible primary or secondary sources?
Justified a clearly stated aim and set of objectives and deliverables


Methodology: Is it clear that ...

An appropriately motivated problem has been defined?
An appropriate plan is defined? This may include software development methodology or, otherwise, stages of your project that ensure delivery of a solution.
Objective and measurable criteria are defined for evaluating the proposed solution?
These criteria are appropriate for the problem and justified from background research?


Implementation and Validation: Is it clear that ...

The solution exists?
I have produced the deliverables specified?
Appropriate steps or standards were taken to ensure a quality output (e.g. design documentation, comments in code)?
The challenges were clearly articulated?
Appropriate and thorough tests were conducted and analysed to validate the quality of deliverables?


Results and Discussion: Is it clear that ...

Appropriate and thorough evaluation was conducted and analysed to evaluate your solution?
Objective and measurable criteria are used for evaluating the achievement of the project against the initial problem specification?
The criteria have been used professionally to judge whether the problem has been solved?
Conclusions draw on the data you have produced and the objectives of the project?
Future work considers multiple aspects of your project? For example, technical improvements, direct extensions, wider impact of the work.


Presentation: Have I ...

Given the report an appropriate title?
Structured the report appropriately, with appendices used for peripheral content and a single references list containing only sources referred to in the report?
Written in a style appropriate to the computing audience?
Written in a consistent manner e.g., tense, use of acronyms, citation style?
Conformed to the requirements for page layout, font size, page limit etc. ?
Ensured that all material included is correctly attributed?


Self-appraisal: Have I...

Considered how my work could be extended?
Included mature personal reflection which leads to lessons learnt?
Suggested how the problems encountered might be avoided?
Considered legal, social, ethical and professional issues, with justification if one or more are not relevant?